🔹 TITLE: Nottingham Building Society - Residential Lending Criteria (All Content)
🔹 DATE: 2025-08-26 23:36:13
🔹 SOURCE: https://www.thenottingham.com/intermediaries/lending-criteria/residential

════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

## Section 1

Residential lending criteria | Nottingham Building Society
FOR INTERMEDIARY USE ONLY
Accessibility tools
Contact
Find a BDM
Paying fees
Register
Log in
Register
Log in
Products and rates
Products and rates
New business product range
Retention rates for existing customers
Criteria
Lending criteria
Residential
Buy-to-let
Overview
Propositions
Propositions
Foreign nationals
Retirement interest-only
Portfolio landlords
Existing borrowers
Existing borrowers
Broker product transfers
Porting
Tools and support
Tools and support
Supporting vulnerable clients
Affordability calculator
Rental calculator
Submit and track business
Paper application process
Broker FAQs
Information
Information
Fees and charges
Proc fees
Useful forms
Legal conveyancing service
Keep up to date
News
Blog
About us
FOR INTERMEDIARY USE ONLY
Contact
Find a BDM
Paying fees
Accessibility tools
Search
Home
Intermediaries
Lending criteria
Residential lending criteria
Lending criteria breakdown
Residential lending criteria
Here's a brief overview of the key factors we consider when assessing a mortgage application:
The application
Advice
We only accept residential applications on an ‘advised’ basis. We currently do not offer an ‘execution only’ service to applicants.
Minimum loan
The minimum loan is £30,000.
Maximum loan and LTV
The maximum loan may be limited due to the maximum higher lending charge (HLC)/ Mortgage Indemnity Guarantee (MIG) available.
Mortgage Product criteria may specify a maximum loan amount.
Criteria
Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees)
Maximum LTV
Traditional residential
£500,000
95%
£750,000
90%
£1,000,000
80%
£1,500,000
75%
Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees)
Maximum LTV
New build house
£750,000
90%
Flats and maisonettes
Non-new build (old build)
£500,000
90%
£750,000
80%
New build
£500,000
80%
Retirement interest-only
£500,000
60%
Maximum term
The maximum term is 40 years.
Interest-only
Allowable up to a maximum of 80% LTV. If over 80%, the whole loan must be on a capital and interest repayment basis.
We need, in writing, a description of the repayment vehicle to repay the mortgage at the end of the mortgage term.
The repayment vehicle must’ve been in place for six months before the mortgage application is submitted.
Examples of acceptable repayment vehicles
Sale of mortgage property: Maximum 60% LTV, minimum equity requirement £200k or 300k in London and the South East (minimum equity applies at point of application).
Only 80% of LTV is allowable using more than one repayment vehicle.
Endowment.
25% of the projected total value of a defined contribution pension plan.
100% of the projected lump sum value of a defined benefit plan.
Equity ISA.
The sale of investment property or a second home, unless occupied by a family member, isn't acceptable (it must be owned in the applicant’s/s’ name only).
If a shortfall is found this must be made up by increasing the deposit.
We’ll accept selling an investment property or second home in England and Wales if the property's equity covers the borrowed amount.
Your client must ensure they have sufficient capital to repay the mortgage at the end of the term.
Examples of unacceptable repayment vehicles
Conversion to repayment in the future.
Cash ISA.
Overpayments from income.
Future inheritance.
Deposit
The applicant/s own deposit or a gift from family is acceptable.
We allow customers applying for a foreign national or returning expat mortgage to use builders’ incentives of up to 5% towards securing a deposit on a UK new build property.
Purchase under value between parent/child can be considered.
Debt consolidation and capital raising
Considered up to a maximum of 80% LTV. Suppose the application includes capital raising to gift the proceeds to a third party. In that case, we'll require a gifting declaration form to be completed and submitted with the application.
Equity purchase
We'll consider equity purchase up to a maximum of 90% LTV.
Home improvements
Are considered up to a maximum of 90% LTV. Estimates will be required where borrowing above 80% LTV.
Remortgages
Properties owned for less than six months will be considered individually. In these circumstances, the free legal service won’t apply.
Credit scoring
Our application systems create a soft footprint on decisions in principle applications. This is converted to a hard footprint on a full mortgage application.
The applicant(s)
Minimum age
The minimum age is 18 (55 for a Retirement Interest Only (RIO) mortgage).
Maximum age
The maximum age is 75 (at end of the mortgage term).
If the applicant plans to work until age 75, we need written confirmation from the adviser on the broker declaration form.
The type of employment will need to reflect their ability to work to age 75.
Lending into retirement
If the mortgage term may exceed our assumed retirement age of 68, document the ability to pay the mortgage on a potentially reduced income.
Max LTV restrictions will apply for applicants lending in or into retirement.
Lending into retirement: if the applicant (or a joint applicant) has earned income, and the mortgage term extends past their intended retirement age. The max LTV 80%.
Lending in retirement: if the applicants aren’t in receipt of any earned income and will be reliant on pension income only – max LTV 70%.
We’ll carefully consider affordability into retirement for older applicants nearing retirement age.
Criteria for foreign national and returning expat mortgage range
Maximum 90% LTV for borrowers with sufficient UK credit data. Or where we can get enough overseas credit data from its data partner in one of the following countries. Countries include Australia, Austria, Canada, the Dominican Republic, Germany, India, Kenya, Mexico, the Philippines, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, and the United States.
Suppose a borrower is from one of the above countries, but an overseas credit file match failed, or the bureau returned insufficient info.
The case can still be considered up to a maximum LTV of 75%.
We will accept applications from foreign nationals on the following visas:
Health & Care Worker.
Skilled Worker.
Global Talent.
Pre-settlement.
UK Ancestry.
British National Overseas.
Tier 2 (if granted before 1st Dec 2020).
Dependant (as a joint applicant).
Spousal/partner (as a joint account).
Armed forces exemption.
You can choose from capital repayment, interest-only, or part and part options.
This is subject to a suitable repayment strategy.
In all cases where borrowers don’t have sufficient UK or overseas credit data, the maximum LTV is 75%.
No minimum time in the UK or minimum time remaining on their visa.
Joint income can be considered subject to the dependent's visa.
The income used for affordability must be in GBP.
Standard affordability checks will be made.
We allow customers applying for a foreign national or returning expat mortgage to use builders' incentives of up to 5% towards securing a deposit on a UK new build property.
Residency (standard residential products)
For foreign nationals, the applicant must have permanent rights to live in the UK and be able to prove this.
HM Armed Forces personnel abroad are UK residents during their deployment.
The applicant/s must have lived in the UK for the past two years.
We don’t accept applicants on working visas.
Credit history - subject to passing credit score, we can consider
CCJs and Defaults less than £500 may be considered.
CCJs and Defaults more than £500 can also be considered if they weren’t registered in the last 3 years.
Missed payments – Status 1 and 2 are acceptable, provided the commitment is up to date.
Bankrupts who’ve been discharged for at least three years.
Employment
The minimum time normally considered in the current job at the time of the application is six months. We may consider three months, provided the occupation is the same and there are no employment gaps.
Applicants currently in a probationary period are acceptable, subject to underwriter discretion. If the customer is on probation, they can apply for a mortgage.
Employees on a fixed-term contract are acceptable. They must be professionals with 12 months of experience on fixed-term contracts in the same profession. Acceptable industries in this category include the NHS and IT. Unacceptable industries include unskilled, manual or clerical workers.
Contractors working via an umbrella company are acceptable. We’ll assess income as weekly income minus employer NI, umbrella company costs and apprenticeship levy × 46.
Temporary/agency/zero-hour contract workers aren’t acceptable.
We’ll consider maternity leave applicants and assess the return-to-work salary.
Please provide us with:
the last pay slip before maternity leave starts, showing the full-time salary.
The applicant/s will need to confirm the following information in writing:
Whether they will return to work full or part-time and the pro rata salary as applicable.
Full details of maternity leave pay, i.e. how many weeks are left at full pay, half pay and statutory maternity pay (SMP).
The savings provisions they have in place to support the mortgage whilst on reduced pay.
What childcare costs (if any) will be payable when they return to work.
The intended return to work date.
Affordability and income
Introduction
The calculator will apply deductions to gross income. It will use tax bands and NI contributions to calculate net income. We’ll assess an applicant's borrowing ability using an affordability test. It will consider their income, debts and expenses. This will confirm the maximum amount we can lend.
Employed income
The calculator will apply deductions to gross income based on tax bands and NI contributions. It will then calculate the net income.
Pay rise
We’ll consider a pay rise where evidence of the increase can be provided. We’ll need a payslip showing the increase and a bank statement showing the new salary credit.
Other income we may assess
Cash in hand: where employees are paid in cash, we need to verify this by regular cash payments into the bank account.
We can’t assess the income if corresponding payments aren’t made.
Profit from UK Land and Property if consistent and shown via two years SA302s minus finance costs: 100%.
Regular overtime or bonus (monthly, quarterly, six-monthly, annually - must prove regularity): 50%.
Child maintenance: 100% subject to six months' paid evidence on bank statements.
Second job income: 100% subject to six months' track record.
Child Tax Credit: 50% (excluding childcare element).
Guaranteed bonus/overtime/shift allowance: 100%.
State and occupational pension: 100%.
Working Families Tax Credit: 50%.
Investment income: not acceptable.
Large town allowance: 100%.
Self-employed income.
Travel allowance: 100%.
Commission: 50%.
We require the applicant to have at least three years of trading and will ask for the last two years' SA302s and corresponding TYOs.
We’ll use the latest year's trading figures, subject to the fact that there will be no more than a 20% fluctuation in the first instance.
If income fluctuates over 20%, we reserve the right to obtain a reference from a suitably qualified accountant. We want to confirm that the latest year's income is sustainable and discover why it fluctuated.
SA302 and Tax Year Overview must relate to an entire 12-month trading period. We’ll consider cases where they may have incorporated from sole trader status to a limited company/partnership. We’ll need at least one year's trading figures to support the change.
Acceptable accountant qualifications
AAPA, FAPA, ACMA, FCMA, ACA, FCA, ACCA, CA, CPFA, FCCA, MAAT, FMAAT, CTA (Fellow), FTII (Fellow), CTA, ATII, ATT, ACPA, and FCPA.
Commitments and expenditure
The affordability calculator will ask for all monthly commitments and household expenditures. The household expenditure should be based on the property to be mortgaged.
We'll consider monthly credit commitments, including student loans. They must have an outstanding term of six months or longer. If not shown, we’ll use 3.00% of the outstanding balances on any/all credit cards as the monthly commitment figure.
Retirement income
We'll accept the following retirement income:
Non RIO
RIO
Lending into retirement
Defined benefits pension
Defined benefits pension
Lending in retirement
Defined benefits pensionDefined contribution pension
Defined benefits pensionDefined contribution pension (annuity only)
Higher lending charge
A higher lending charge is payable on loans above 80% LTV.
Advance
Premium
80.00% or below
No higher lending charge
80.01% - 95.00%
We pay the higher lending charge for the borrower
Supporting documents
For each application, we need
Where the applicant is employed (including PAYE directors):
Where the LTV is 80% or above, the applicant is a first-time buyer or renting, and bank statements are needed for the last three months.
Underwriters may ask for bank statements at their discretion.
Last month's pay slip.
At least the last three consecutive payslips must show monthly bonuses, overtime, shift allowances and commission. For quarterly bonuses, provide 2 payslips showing the payment or a P60 may be accepted if this can clearly evidence the bonus payment within the gross income.
Annual bonus - most recent payslip evidencing annual bonus payment. A P60 may be accepted if this can clearly evidence the bonus payment within the gross income.
Where the applicant is self-employed:
Three years' accounts or SA302s and tax year overviews.
We may need to write to the applicant's accountant for a reference.
Last three months' business bank statements.
ID for each application
UK photocard driving licence (full or provisional).
UK paper driving licence (full only).
EU state member ID card.
UK residence permit.
UK or EU passport.
Non-EU passport.
Non-EU ID card.
Council tax bill.
All submitted documents must be photocopies of the originals. We can’t consider photographs or camera-scanned documents.
Proof of address
It’s assumed that an electoral roll search will verify proof of address. If verification doesn’t occur, you will be asked to submit one of the following documents:
Bank statement (postal or printed and stamped in branch).
UK photocard driving licence (full or provisional).
UK paper driving licence (full only).
Local authority tenancy agreement .
Tax credit or pension credit letter.
HMRC tax code notification.
State pension letter.
State benefit letter.
Mortgage statement.
Recent utility bill.
Council tax bill.
All submitted documents must be photocopies of the originals. We can’t consider photographs or camera-scanned documents.
Sorry, we can’t use the same document to check the applicant's ID and address. If you can't provide any of the above documents, please contact intermediary support on 0344 481 2010. Press option two to chat about further options.
Residential applicants who own other properties
Introduction
We will consider an application where the customer owns other properties and is not a current owner occupier, for example they live with family or are renting due to work commitments We must be satisfied that our security will be the customer's main permanent residence. We may need proof of deposit for the new purchase.
Let-to-buy
New residential mortgages can be considered up to 90% max LTV where the customer is, for example, upsizing or relocating with their job. We must be satisfied that the existing mortgages will be converted to a permanent letting agreement.
We need:
Rental coverage of 125% of the mortgage commitment. This calculation must include any added capital raising for deposit funds.
We'll annualise any shortfall if the rental coverage is under 125%.
We will deduct it from income before applying our income multiples to new residential mortgages.
No surplus rental income will be assessed.
Where the existing property has little equity or negative equity, we may be unable to help, and the case should be referred to us before submission.
Consent to let confirmation, in writing, from the existing lender or a copy of the let-to-buy) LTB remortgage offer from the new lender.
A professional letting agent's letter confirming the potential rental income.
Existing residential property up for sale
The customer(s) have their existing residential property up for sale but may have yet to sell by the time they complete the new purchase.
We'll assess as follows:
Up to 90% LTV, we will treat the existing mortgage payment as a commitment.
Over 90% LTV, the existing mortgage must be redeemed.
We need a copy of the estate agent's sales details.
Existing matrimonial/dependent relative(s) mortgages to remain
If the existing matrimonial/dependent relative(s) mortgage is to stay, we must be sure the new home is for the customer's use.
We’ll assess as follows:
Up to 90% LTV, we will treat the existing mortgage payment as a commitment.
Above 90% LTV the existing mortgage must be redeemed.
Existing buy-to-let properties in the background
Professional landlords are considered self-employed.
We need two years' accounts and/or tax assessments to complete an assets and liabilities statement.
Where the existing property has little equity or negative equity, we may be unable to help, and the case should be referred to us before submission.
For non-professional landlords, we'll consider BTL (buy-to-let) mortgages as self-financing, subject to:
If the rental coverage is less than 125%, any shortfall will be considered in the affordability calculation.
Consent to let will be needed, or proof the mortgage is on a BTL basis (BTL mortgage statement).
Proof of rental income and mortgage payment/s on the most recent bank statement/s.
This calculation including any added capital raising for deposit funds.
Rental coverage must be 125% of the mortgage commitment.
New residential mortgages can be considered up to a maximum of 90% LTV.
The property
Acceptable properties
Acceptable cladding types: brick, block, or other strong, fireproof cladding with the right safety certification.
Solar panels: houses fitted with solar panels are acceptable.
Provided that adequate insurance is in place to cover any damage caused to the property by the solar panels.
New build warranties: we accept NHBC, Premier Guarantee, BLP, Buildzone, LABC, The Q Policy, Protek, and ICW.
Our free legal service is unavailable for remortgage applications on houses with leased solar panels.
Wimpey No-fines House and Laing Easiform house can be considered subject to a satisfactory valuation.
Property must be of traditional construction with brick or stone walls and pitched slate or tile roof
New build houses are acceptable up to 90% LTV (we can accept builders' deposits for foreign national or returning expat mortgages up to 5%). A new build property is defined as one built or converted in the last two years, which has never been sold. NBS do not accept the following: builders cash incentives over 5%, help to buy scheme, armed forces help to buy scheme, shared ownership, own and new, deposit unlock.
Houses and bungalows with a minimum internal floor area of 50 m2.
Flats and studios with a minimum internal floor area of 35 m2.
The property must be the applicant's main permanent residence.
Structurally Insulated Panel Systems (SIPS).
Insulated concrete formwork (ICF).
Modern timber frame or oak frame.
Properties in England and Wales.
Modern steel frame.
Ground rent and service charge
Outside London
Ground rent is £250 max, with a review period of at least 10 years.
Service charges: generally 1% considered acceptable but can be up to 1.5% depending on facilities – lifts, concierge, gym, communal grounds, etc.
Inside London
Ground rent is £1,000 max, with a review period of at least 10 years.
Service charges: generally 1% considered acceptable but can be up to 1.5% depending on facilities – lifts, concierge, gym, communal grounds, etc.
Flats
Flats/maisonettes (including new builds) are acceptable for owner-occupiers but must be leasehold.
(not for BTL applications).
Flats requiring an EWS1 form must provide a valid EWS1 form to support the property valuation.
Flat roofs are acceptable and subject to a minimum 25-year insurance-backed guarantee.
If above a shop, the flat must have its entrance separate from the shop entrance.
No limit on the number of storeys for flats on both residential and BTL mortgages.
Max LTV on residential mortgages for non-new-build flats is 90%.
We'll only lend on flats above the fourth floor with lift access.
Criteria
Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees)
Maximum LTV
Traditional residential
£500,000
95%
£750,000
90%
£1,000,000
80%
£1,500,000
75%
Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees)
Maximum LTV
New build house
£750,000
90%
Flats and maisonettes
Non-new build (old build)
£500,000
90%
£750,000
80%
New build
£500,000
80%
Retirement interest-only
£500,000
60%
Unacceptable properties
Any construction covered by Housing Defect laws.
Includes high alumina cement, prefabricated reinforced concrete and large panel systems
Ex-local authority and housing association (ex-public sector flats), including Right to Buy flats.
Purchases that the vendor has owned for less than six months.
Steel framed properties (only modern steel frame is acceptable).
Straw bale, hempcrete and volumetric construction.
Timber-framed properties with timber cladding.
Unacceptable roof types: sedum (living green).
Self-build products available via BuildStore.
Second homes/holiday homes.
Prefabricated properties.
Mobile home/houseboat.
Freehold flats.
Valuations
All products are subject to valuation. These are instructed via a panel management company and encompass a variety of national surveying firms.
Tenure
Both freehold and leasehold are acceptable. If leasehold, the minimum required unexpired term on a lease must be at least 85 years from the commencement of the mortgage.
Special schemes
Introduction
Shared ownership/shared equity/Government HomeBuy purchases are not acceptable. We can consider a remortgage in which the applicant buys out the final tranche, but the free legal service is unavailable. We require a copy of the final tranche sale paperwork to be uploaded.
Right to buy
Applications are considered on the following basis:
The second charge will require a Deed of Postponement at extra cost to the applicant. This does not apply if only 12 months of the discount period remain.
If no added funds are being raised, remortgaging an Right to Buy (RTB) property within the five-year pre-emption period can be considered.
The RTB is usually restricted to the official tenants who must also be party to the mortgage.
We don't offer RTB on flats, only houses.
Maximum loan 100% of the discounted purchase price plus up to £250 costs.
No added borrowing for home improvements is available.
A copy of the RTB letter should be obtained.
Cookies policy
Privacy policy
Terms of business
Sitemap
Privacy preference centerWhen you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.
More informationAllow all cookies Manage consent preferencesStrictly Necessary CookiesAlways activeThese cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.Performance Cookies Performance Cookies These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.Functional Cookies Functional Cookies These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.Targeting Cookies Targeting Cookies These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.Back ButtonPerformance Cookies Search IconFilter IconClear checkbox label labelApply CancelConsent Leg.Interest checkbox label label checkbox label label checkbox label label Confirm my choices
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

## Section 2

Residential lending criteria | Nottingham Building Society FOR INTERMEDIARY USE ONLY Accessibility tools Contact Find a BDM Paying fees Register Log in Register Log in Products and rates Products and rates New business product range Retention rates for existing customers Criteria Lending criteria Residential Buy-to-let Overview Propositions Propositions Foreign nationals Retirement interest-only Portfolio landlords Existing borrowers Existing borrowers Broker product transfers Porting Tools and support Tools and support Supporting vulnerable clients Affordability calculator Rental calculator Submit and track business Paper application process Broker FAQs Information Information Fees and charges Proc fees Useful forms Legal conveyancing service Keep up to date News Blog About us FOR INTERMEDIARY USE ONLY Contact Find a BDM Paying fees Accessibility tools Search Home Intermediaries Lending criteria Residential lending criteria Lending criteria breakdown Residential lending criteria Here's a brief overview of the key factors we consider when assessing a mortgage application: The application Advice We only accept residential applications on an ‘advised’ basis. We currently do not offer an ‘execution only’ service to applicants. Minimum loan The minimum loan is £30,000. Maximum loan and LTV The maximum loan may be limited due to the maximum higher lending charge (HLC)/ Mortgage Indemnity Guarantee (MIG) available. Mortgage Product criteria may specify a maximum loan amount. Criteria Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees) Maximum LTV Traditional residential £500,000 95% £750,000 90% £1,000,000 80% £1,500,000 75% Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees) Maximum LTV New build house £750,000 90% Flats and maisonettes Non-new build (old build) £500,000 90% £750,000 80% New build £500,000 80% Retirement interest-only £500,000 60% Maximum term The maximum term is 40 years. Interest-only Allowable up to a maximum of 80% LTV. If over 80%, the whole loan must be on a capital and interest repayment basis. We need, in writing, a description of the repayment vehicle to repay the mortgage at the end of the mortgage term. The repayment vehicle must’ve been in place for six months before the mortgage application is submitted. Examples of acceptable repayment vehicles Sale of mortgage property: Maximum 60% LTV, minimum equity requirement £200k or 300k in London and the South East (minimum equity applies at point of application). Only 80% of LTV is allowable using more than one repayment vehicle. Endowment. 25% of the projected total value of a defined contribution pension plan. 100% of the projected lump sum value of a defined benefit plan. Equity ISA. The sale of investment property or a second home, unless occupied by a family member, isn't acceptable (it must be owned in the applicant’s/s’ name only). If a shortfall is found this must be made up by increasing the deposit. We’ll accept selling an investment property or second home in England and Wales if the property's equity covers the borrowed amount. Your client must ensure they have sufficient capital to repay the mortgage at the end of the term. Examples of unacceptable repayment vehicles Conversion to repayment in the future. Cash ISA. Overpayments from income. Future inheritance. Deposit The applicant/s own deposit or a gift from family is acceptable. We allow customers applying for a foreign national or returning expat mortgage to use builders’ incentives of up to 5% towards securing a deposit on a UK new build property. Purchase under value between parent/child can be considered. Debt consolidation and capital raising Considered up to a maximum of 80% LTV. Suppose the application includes capital raising to gift the proceeds to a third party. In that case, we'll require a gifting declaration form to be completed and submitted with the application. Equity purchase We'll consider equity purchase up to a maximum of 90% LTV. Home improvements Are considered up to a maximum of 90% LTV. Estimates will be required where borrowing above 80% LTV. Remortgages Properties owned for less than six months will be considered individually. In these circumstances, the free legal service won’t apply. Credit scoring Our application systems create a soft footprint on decisions in principle applications. This is converted to a hard footprint on a full mortgage application. The applicant(s) Minimum age The minimum age is 18 (55 for a Retirement Interest Only (RIO) mortgage). Maximum age The maximum age is 75 (at end of the mortgage term). If the applicant plans to work until age 75, we need written confirmation from the adviser on the broker declaration form. The type of employment will need to reflect their ability to work to age 75. Lending into retirement If the mortgage term may exceed our assumed retirement age of 68, document the ability to pay the mortgage on a potentially reduced income. Max LTV restrictions will apply for applicants lending in or into retirement. Lending into retirement: if the applicant (or a joint applicant) has earned income, and the mortgage term extends past their intended retirement age. The max LTV 80%. Lending in retirement: if the applicants aren’t in receipt of any earned income and will be reliant on pension income only – max LTV 70%. We’ll carefully consider affordability into retirement for older applicants nearing retirement age. Criteria for foreign national and returning expat mortgage range Maximum 90% LTV for borrowers with sufficient UK credit data. Or where we can get enough overseas credit data from its data partner in one of the following countries. Countries include Australia, Austria, Canada, the Dominican Republic, Germany, India, Kenya, Mexico, the Philippines, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, and the United States. Suppose a borrower is from one of the above countries, but an overseas credit file match failed, or the bureau returned insufficient info. The case can still be considered up to a maximum LTV of 75%. We will accept applications from foreign nationals on the following visas: Health & Care Worker. Skilled Worker. Global Talent. Pre-settlement. UK Ancestry. British National Overseas. Tier 2 (if granted before 1st Dec 2020). Dependant (as a joint applicant). Spousal/partner (as a joint account). Armed forces exemption. You can choose from capital repayment, interest-only, or part and part options. This is subject to a suitable repayment strategy. In all cases where borrowers don’t have sufficient UK or overseas credit data, the maximum LTV is 75%. No minimum time in the UK or minimum time remaining on their visa. Joint income can be considered subject to the dependent's visa. The income used for affordability must be in GBP. Standard affordability checks will be made. We allow customers applying for a foreign national or returning expat mortgage to use builders' incentives of up to 5% towards securing a deposit on a UK new build property. Residency (standard residential products) For foreign nationals, the applicant must have permanent rights to live in the UK and be able to prove this. HM Armed Forces personnel abroad are UK residents during their deployment. The applicant/s must have lived in the UK for the past two years. We don’t accept applicants on working visas. Credit history - subject to passing credit score, we can consider CCJs and Defaults less than £500 may be considered. CCJs and Defaults more than £500 can also be considered if they weren’t registered in the last 3 years. Missed payments – Status 1 and 2 are acceptable, provided the commitment is up to date. Bankrupts who’ve been discharged for at least three years. Employment The minimum time normally considered in the current job at the time of the application is six months. We may consider three months, provided the occupation is the same and there are no employment gaps. Applicants currently in a probationary period are acceptable, subject to underwriter discretion. If the customer is on probation, they can apply for a mortgage. Employees on a fixed-term contract are acceptable. They must be professionals with 12 months of experience on fixed-term contracts in the same profession. Acceptable industries in this category include the NHS and IT. Unacceptable industries include unskilled, manual or clerical workers. Contractors working via an umbrella company are acceptable. We’ll assess income as weekly income minus employer NI, umbrella company costs and apprenticeship levy × 46. Temporary/agency/zero-hour contract workers aren’t acceptable. We’ll consider maternity leave applicants and assess the return-to-work salary. Please provide us with: the last pay slip before maternity leave starts, showing the full-time salary. The applicant/s will need to confirm the following information in writing: Whether they will return to work full or part-time and the pro rata salary as applicable. Full details of maternity leave pay, i.e. how many weeks are left at full pay, half pay and statutory maternity pay (SMP). The savings provisions they have in place to support the mortgage whilst on reduced pay. What childcare costs (if any) will be payable when they return to work. The intended return to work date. Affordability and income Introduction The calculator will apply deductions to gross income. It will use tax bands and NI contributions to calculate net income. We’ll assess an applicant's borrowing ability using an affordability test. It will consider their income, debts and expenses. This will confirm the maximum amount we can lend. Employed income The calculator will apply deductions to gross income based on tax bands and NI contributions. It will then calculate the net income. Pay rise We’ll consider a pay rise where evidence of the increase can be provided. We’ll need a payslip showing the increase and a bank statement showing the new salary credit. Other income we may assess Cash in hand: where employees are paid in cash, we need to verify this by regular cash payments into the bank account. We can’t assess the income if corresponding payments aren’t made. Profit from UK Land and Property if consistent and shown via two years SA302s minus finance costs: 100%. Regular overtime or bonus (monthly, quarterly, six-monthly, annually - must prove regularity): 50%. Child maintenance: 100% subject to six months' paid evidence on bank statements. Second job income: 100% subject to six months' track record. Child Tax Credit: 50% (excluding childcare element). Guaranteed bonus/overtime/shift allowance: 100%. State and occupational pension: 100%. Working Families Tax Credit: 50%. Investment income: not acceptable. Large town allowance: 100%. Self-employed income. Travel allowance: 100%. Commission: 50%. We require the applicant to have at least three years of trading and will ask for the last two years' SA302s and corresponding TYOs. We’ll use the latest year's trading figures, subject to the fact that there will be no more than a 20% fluctuation in the first instance. If income fluctuates over 20%, we reserve the right to obtain a reference from a suitably qualified accountant. We want to confirm that the latest year's income is sustainable and discover why it fluctuated. SA302 and Tax Year Overview must relate to an entire 12-month trading period. We’ll consider cases where they may have incorporated from sole trader status to a limited company/partnership. We’ll need at least one year's trading figures to support the change. Acceptable accountant qualifications AAPA, FAPA, ACMA, FCMA, ACA, FCA, ACCA, CA, CPFA, FCCA, MAAT, FMAAT, CTA (Fellow), FTII (Fellow), CTA, ATII, ATT, ACPA, and FCPA. Commitments and expenditure The affordability calculator will ask for all monthly commitments and household expenditures. The household expenditure should be based on the property to be mortgaged. We'll consider monthly credit commitments, including student loans. They must have an outstanding term of six months or longer. If not shown, we’ll use 3.00% of the outstanding balances on any/all credit cards as the monthly commitment figure. Retirement income We'll accept the following retirement income: Non RIO RIO Lending into retirement Defined benefits pension Defined benefits pension Lending in retirement Defined benefits pensionDefined contribution pension Defined benefits pensionDefined contribution pension (annuity only) Higher lending charge A higher lending charge is payable on loans above 80% LTV. Advance Premium 80.00% or below No higher lending charge 80.01% - 95.00% We pay the higher lending charge for the borrower Supporting documents For each application, we need Where the applicant is employed (including PAYE directors): Where the LTV is 80% or above, the applicant is a first-time buyer or renting, and bank statements are needed for the last three months. Underwriters may ask for bank statements at their discretion. Last month's pay slip. At least the last three consecutive payslips must show monthly bonuses, overtime, shift allowances and commission. For quarterly bonuses, provide 2 payslips showing the payment or a P60 may be accepted if this can clearly evidence the bonus payment within the gross income. Annual bonus - most recent payslip evidencing annual bonus payment. A P60 may be accepted if this can clearly evidence the bonus payment within the gross income. Where the applicant is self-employed: Three years' accounts or SA302s and tax year overviews. We may need to write to the applicant's accountant for a reference. Last three months' business bank statements. ID for each application UK photocard driving licence (full or provisional). UK paper driving licence (full only). EU state member ID card. UK residence permit. UK or EU passport. Non-EU passport. Non-EU ID card. Council tax bill. All submitted documents must be photocopies of the originals. We can’t consider photographs or camera-scanned documents. Proof of address It’s assumed that an electoral roll search will verify proof of address. If verification doesn’t occur, you will be asked to submit one of the following documents: Bank statement (postal or printed and stamped in branch). UK photocard driving licence (full or provisional). UK paper driving licence (full only). Local authority tenancy agreement . Tax credit or pension credit letter. HMRC tax code notification. State pension letter. State benefit letter. Mortgage statement. Recent utility bill. Council tax bill. All submitted documents must be photocopies of the originals. We can’t consider photographs or camera-scanned documents. Sorry, we can’t use the same document to check the applicant's ID and address. If you can't provide any of the above documents, please contact intermediary support on 0344 481 2010. Press option two to chat about further options. Residential applicants who own other properties Introduction We will consider an application where the customer owns other properties and is not a current owner occupier, for example they live with family or are renting due to work commitments We must be satisfied that our security will be the customer's main permanent residence. We may need proof of deposit for the new purchase. Let-to-buy New residential mortgages can be considered up to 90% max LTV where the customer is, for example, upsizing or relocating with their job. We must be satisfied that the existing mortgages will be converted to a permanent letting agreement. We need: Rental coverage of 125% of the mortgage commitment. This calculation must include any added capital raising for deposit funds. We'll annualise any shortfall if the rental coverage is under 125%. We will deduct it from income before applying our income multiples to new residential mortgages. No surplus rental income will be assessed. Where the existing property has little equity or negative equity, we may be unable to help, and the case should be referred to us before submission. Consent to let confirmation, in writing, from the existing lender or a copy of the let-to-buy) LTB remortgage offer from the new lender. A professional letting agent's letter confirming the potential rental income. Existing residential property up for sale The customer(s) have their existing residential property up for sale but may have yet to sell by the time they complete the new purchase. We'll assess as follows: Up to 90% LTV, we will treat the existing mortgage payment as a commitment. Over 90% LTV, the existing mortgage must be redeemed. We need a copy of the estate agent's sales details. Existing matrimonial/dependent relative(s) mortgages to remain If the existing matrimonial/dependent relative(s) mortgage is to stay, we must be sure the new home is for the customer's use. We’ll assess as follows: Up to 90% LTV, we will treat the existing mortgage payment as a commitment. Above 90% LTV the existing mortgage must be redeemed. Existing buy-to-let properties in the background Professional landlords are considered self-employed. We need two years' accounts and/or tax assessments to complete an assets and liabilities statement. Where the existing property has little equity or negative equity, we may be unable to help, and the case should be referred to us before submission. For non-professional landlords, we'll consider BTL (buy-to-let) mortgages as self-financing, subject to: If the rental coverage is less than 125%, any shortfall will be considered in the affordability calculation. Consent to let will be needed, or proof the mortgage is on a BTL basis (BTL mortgage statement). Proof of rental income and mortgage payment/s on the most recent bank statement/s. This calculation including any added capital raising for deposit funds. Rental coverage must be 125% of the mortgage commitment. New residential mortgages can be considered up to a maximum of 90% LTV. The property Acceptable properties Acceptable cladding types: brick, block, or other strong, fireproof cladding with the right safety certification. Solar panels: houses fitted with solar panels are acceptable. Provided that adequate insurance is in place to cover any damage caused to the property by the solar panels. New build warranties: we accept NHBC, Premier Guarantee, BLP, Buildzone, LABC, The Q Policy, Protek, and ICW. Our free legal service is unavailable for remortgage applications on houses with leased solar panels. Wimpey No-fines House and Laing Easiform house can be considered subject to a satisfactory valuation. Property must be of traditional construction with brick or stone walls and pitched slate or tile roof New build houses are acceptable up to 90% LTV (we can accept builders' deposits for foreign national or returning expat mortgages up to 5%). A new build property is defined as one built or converted in the last two years, which has never been sold. NBS do not accept the following: builders cash incentives over 5%, help to buy scheme, armed forces help to buy scheme, shared ownership, own and new, deposit unlock. Houses and bungalows with a minimum internal floor area of 50 m2. Flats and studios with a minimum internal floor area of 35 m2. The property must be the applicant's main permanent residence. Structurally Insulated Panel Systems (SIPS). Insulated concrete formwork (ICF). Modern timber frame or oak frame. Properties in England and Wales. Modern steel frame. Ground rent and service charge Outside London Ground rent is £250 max, with a review period of at least 10 years. Service charges: generally 1% considered acceptable but can be up to 1.5% depending on facilities – lifts, concierge, gym, communal grounds, etc. Inside London Ground rent is £1,000 max, with a review period of at least 10 years. Service charges: generally 1% considered acceptable but can be up to 1.5% depending on facilities – lifts, concierge, gym, communal grounds, etc. Flats Flats/maisonettes (including new builds) are acceptable for owner-occupiers but must be leasehold. (not for BTL applications). Flats requiring an EWS1 form must provide a valid EWS1 form to support the property valuation. Flat roofs are acceptable and subject to a minimum 25-year insurance-backed guarantee. If above a shop, the flat must have its entrance separate from the shop entrance. No limit on the number of storeys for flats on both residential and BTL mortgages. Max LTV on residential mortgages for non-new-build flats is 90%. We'll only lend on flats above the fourth floor with lift access. Criteria Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees) Maximum LTV Traditional residential £500,000 95% £750,000 90% £1,000,000 80% £1,500,000 75% Maximum loan size (inclusive of capitalised fees) Maximum LTV New build house £750,000 90% Flats and maisonettes Non-new build (old build) £500,000 90% £750,000 80% New build £500,000 80% Retirement interest-only £500,000 60% Unacceptable properties Any construction covered by Housing Defect laws. Includes high alumina cement, prefabricated reinforced concrete and large panel systems Ex-local authority and housing association (ex-public sector flats), including Right to Buy flats. Purchases that the vendor has owned for less than six months. Steel framed properties (only modern steel frame is acceptable). Straw bale, hempcrete and volumetric construction. Timber-framed properties with timber cladding. Unacceptable roof types: sedum (living green). Self-build products available via BuildStore. Second homes/holiday homes. Prefabricated properties. Mobile home/houseboat. Freehold flats. Valuations All products are subject to valuation. These are instructed via a panel management company and encompass a variety of national surveying firms. Tenure Both freehold and leasehold are acceptable. If leasehold, the minimum required unexpired term on a lease must be at least 85 years from the commencement of the mortgage. Special schemes Introduction Shared ownership/shared equity/Government HomeBuy purchases are not acceptable. We can consider a remortgage in which the applicant buys out the final tranche, but the free legal service is unavailable. We require a copy of the final tranche sale paperwork to be uploaded. Right to buy Applications are considered on the following basis: The second charge will require a Deed of Postponement at extra cost to the applicant. This does not apply if only 12 months of the discount period remain. If no added funds are being raised, remortgaging an Right to Buy (RTB) property within the five-year pre-emption period can be considered. The RTB is usually restricted to the official tenants who must also be party to the mortgage. We don't offer RTB on flats, only houses. Maximum loan 100% of the discounted purchase price plus up to £250 costs. No added borrowing for home improvements is available. A copy of the RTB letter should be obtained. Cookies policy Privacy policy Terms of business Sitemap Privacy preference centerWhen you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer. More informationAllow all cookies Manage consent preferencesStrictly Necessary CookiesAlways activeThese cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.Performance Cookies Performance Cookies These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.Functional Cookies Functional Cookies These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.Targeting Cookies Targeting Cookies These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.Back ButtonPerformance Cookies Search IconFilter IconClear checkbox label labelApply CancelConsent Leg.Interest checkbox label label checkbox label label checkbox label label Confirm my choices
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────



### What We Can and Can't Accept

#### Lending Criteria Overview

We use soft searches and flexible criteria to determine if we can assist with challenging cases. Our Decision in Principle (DIP) stage ensures our actions don’t leave a hard footprint on your client’s credit file, offering a non-intrusive approach.

- **Mortgage or Secured Loan Arrears**: We can accept up to 2 instances in the last 24 months.
- **Unsecured Loan Arrears**: We can accept up to 2 instances in the last 24 months.
- **CCJs (County Court Judgments)**: A single satisfied CCJ up to £500 may be considered if it’s at least three years old.
- **Defaults**: Satisfied defaults up to £250 may be considered if there are none for a mortgage or secured loan. Defaults over £250 must be satisfied for at least three years.
- **Bankruptcy**: Must be discharged for three years. We only need the discharge certificate for this service. No other documents are required for all other criteria points.

#### Minimum Packaging Requirements

Check our minimum packaging guide to find out what documents you need to submit with your application. This will help provide a speedier underwriting decision.