
Product and loan criteria
Products available up to 80% LTV
Buy to let products have a maximum loan of £1,500,000. Maximum loan amounts will depend on the application, please see our Maximum loan per property table for more detail
125% Interest Cover Ratio (ICR) for Buy to Let
First Time Landlords (Subject to standard criteria) are accepted.
Visit our product finder to view our product range and information, including stress rates.

Back to top
Limited Company key criteria
Company information
To qualify for a Limited Company mortgage with us the company has to be set up with the sole purpose of buying, letting and selling properties. These are known as Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs).

Only SPVs with one or more of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes are considered:
68100, 68201, 68209, 68320
To find which SIC codes are associated with a company you can search here (opens in a new window)
Partnerships or LLPs aren’t accepted.
Companies must be registered in England, Wales or Scotland. SPVs are considered from day one of being set up.
A floating charge over assets of the company isn't required.
SPVs that have associated commercial property/assets are not accepted.
Personal guarantees are required from all directors in all cases.
The account from which the Direct Debit payment is made must match the Limited Company name.
We won't accept Layered companies. A layered company is where another company has a shareholding in the proposed company, or where the proposed company has a shareholding in another company.
The company must have a private limited legal status
Please be aware that all guarantors will need to obtain Independent Legal Advice prior to completing the Deed of Guarantee.

Company structure
Directors/shareholders must meet our standard lending criteria.
Companies must be a SPV; company structures outside of this aren’t acceptable.
The total number of employees must not exceed the number of directors/shareholders listed.
The maximum number of directors/shareholders is two.
We'll accept applications where one applicant is only a shareholder (who owns at least 20% of the shares in the company).
We'll accept where there are two directors, but only one is a shareholder who owns all the shares in the company.
Where the applicant is a director and shareholder, the director must have at least 1% share.
Directors/shareholders may only have one limited company financed with us.
Directors/shareholders who have an application with us must match records at Companies House.
Make sure to input the Company/Person with Significant Control (PSC) director details correctly, because we will not accept a structure where there is a PSC that is not an applicant. Please note we're legally obliged to tell Companies House if there’s a discrepancy between beneficial owner details and the information on the people with significant control (PSC) register (opens in a new window).
The company must advise us of any proposed changes in the directors of the company or shareholding. If your client fails to comply, this may lead to legal action against them.
If your clients are both directors of the company however only one has a shareholding, then 100% of the shareholding must be owned by the directors to be acceptable to The Mortgage Works.
Only the director of the SPV will have account access with decision making responsibilities. For example completing a rate switch or amending the term or repayment method.
Purchase of Directors main residence
We'll consider applications where a Limited Company is purchasing a main residence from one of its directors/shareholders to use as a buy to let. This is subject to:

A simultaneous onward purchase of a new residential property (with another lender), address to be supplied on application and confirmed by the acting solicitor prior to completion.
The director/shareholder leaving the residential address the Limited Company is purchasing upon completion – and providing us with a new correspondence address (if required).
Providing a copy of the onward residential mortgage offer prior to completion (if applicable).
A Limited Company purchase product must be selected.
Portfolio landlords
If the company and its directors own four or more mortgaged properties, either separately or altogether, then our Portfolio landlord criteria applies.
Back to top
Source of deposit
Intercompany loans
We'll accept an intercompany loan as a source of deposit, subject to:

The company structure mirroring across the SPV and the connected company (directors/shareholders must match). Where an SPV is jointly owned, it is acceptable for the donor company to be owned solely by one of the SPVs shareholders.
It must be a UK to UK company (no offshore companies).
The donor company must have been trading for a minimum of 12 months and must have accounts filed that reflect the donor company actively trading. It's unacceptable for only dormant accounts to have been filed.
When applying, the following evidence must be provided:

Loan Agreement
The loan is repayable.
A term has been agreed (not exceeding the term of the mortgage).
The rate of interest due is at least HMRC’s (opens in a new window) ‘Actual Official Rate’.
The monthly payment or interest payments are being rolled up.
Where there's a monthly loan repayment, we'll deduct this from the rent and the surplus used for affordability purposes in the ICR calculation.
Where the interest payments are being rolled up, this will not affect affordability.
There is no interest or charge over the security.
Donor company bank statements
One month of bank statements, dated within the previous three months. If the loan has been sent to the SPV, we'll require a full month of transaction history prior to the transfer.
SPV company bank statements
Three months’ worth of statements from the borrowing SPV if it is an established company.
We won't assess the application until you have submitted all required evidence.

Gifts
A gifted deposit from individuals to director(s) are acceptable, however gifts to the company are not.
We'll accept a gift of equity if the property is already owned by the director(s) and is being purchased by their Limited Company. Please note these applications must be submitted as a purchase.
Non-UK gifts and funds from non-UK companies or trusts are not accepted. If directors of the SPV have funds overseas, these can be considered subject to an audit trail.
Shareholder funds
We'll accept the source of funds coming from someone who is only a shareholder of the SPV where the funds are:

a loan to the company
from Share Capital Investment (where the shareholder is increasing their shareholding by injecting capital into the business).
We won't accept

Advance payment for goods or services from the SPV
Gift or Capital Contribution (where the shareholder provides funds as a gift or voluntary capital contribution without receiving additional shares).
Bounce back loans
We don’t accept Business Bounce Back Loan as deposit.
Back to top
Company changes
If your client is planning to make changes to the directors or shareholding of their company, they must let us know directly in advance.

If the company changes have already been made, your client will need to re-instate the structure we originally agreed to, or redeem their mortgage.

You must apply for our consent to make any company changes. All applications are subject to a risk assessment.

Please complete and ask your client to sign our Change of Director/Shareholder form. You can then post the completed form, along with the required identification to:

The Mortgage Works
Northampton Administration Centre
Kings Park Road
Moulton Park
Northampton, NN3 6NW 

If we approve your request, you will need to pay a ‘change of parties fee’. See Our fees and charges for details.

Unacceptable company changes
We won't accept the following changes:

Conversion of the company to a Charity, Trust or Foundation.
Restructuring the company so it becomes part of a layered company, including subsidiaries, parent and sister companies.
Having any links to offshore companies, including the Channel Islands and Isle of Man.
Addition of directors or shareholders under the age of 21.
Having more than two directors/shareholders in the company. The maximum number of directors/shareholders is two and they must be the same people.
Back to top
Underwriting requirements
Our specialist underwriting team will confirm the case requirements when your client’s application is submitted. In most cases, we’ll request:

Proof of deposit (purchase applications)
Property schedule (Please note: where a property schedule is required, the application will not be reviewed by an Underwriter until it is received)
3 months' personal bank statements for all directors.
If you haven't met with the directors 'face to face' then you'll be required to certify documents used to support your client's application.

If we're unable to verify your client electronically, we'll ask you to provide the Certificate of Incorporation.

We reserve the right to request additional information to satisfy requirements.

Back to top
Before you apply
You can apply for Limited Company products through TMW Online (opens in a new window). For a newly created Limited Company, please wait 3 days before applying for any products.

You can't obtain a Decision in Principle (DIP) through TMW Online. You should obtain Mortgage Illustrations from your usual sourcing system.

Companies House pre-application check
Before you apply, we’ll validate SPV information on Companies House to ensure it matches. There can be examples where you get a decline message related to Unacceptable Person of Significant Control.

This could be due to:

A difference between Director or Shareholder details and Person of Significant Control (PSC) on Companies House.
A PSC that is not an applicant.
The Officer and PSC name match on Companies House but the Shareholder names are not correct.
To correct this, please do the following:

Check the filing history and any confirmation statements to see if the Shareholder details have been updated. If they have, they will show the names of the current Shareholders for you to compare to.
If the Shareholder names do not show, check the document labelled 'Incorporation' and this will detail the Shareholder structure when the Limited Company was created. Open this document and go to the Initial Shareholdings section and check that the Shareholder names and addresses match.
If the names do not match, the shareholding information on Companies House will need to be updated.
It takes 3 days for Companies House updates to show on our records, so please wait to reapply.
If all names match and there are no differences, please email dip@themortgageworks.co.uk who will review and add a decline appeal to your case to enable you to continue.
If our interest rates change before the update of the Companies House information, we may be able to honour the original rate you were looking to apply for. This is only if there’s a discrepancy in the spelling or special characters of the Directors, Shareholders or Company name.

Once Companies House has been updated, you should submit a new application on one of the updated rates. This must be within 7 working days of the original application. Then email dip@themortgageworks.co.uk quoting both the new and the original reference number. You'll need to include details of the original product you were looking to apply for.

TMW Online updates every 10 minutes, so you can get an up-to-date case update online.

Back to top
Additional information
For new applications, we'll be paying an additional 0.10% gross procuration fee for Limited Company cases. This will be payable via your usual Mortgage Club or Network.
We aren’t insisting on separate solicitor representation for you and your client.
We'll require first legal charge over the security.
Back to top
Useful guides and forms
Choose one of our useful supporting forms to view and download as a PDF.

Gifted Deposit form
Deed of Guarantee
Property schedule
Back to top