Buy-to-let lending criteria | Nottingham Building Society
FOR INTERMEDIARY USE ONLY
Accessibility tools
Contact
Find a BDM
Paying fees
Register
Log in
Register
Log in
Products and rates
Products and rates
New business product range
Retention rates for existing customers
Criteria
Lending criteria
Residential
Buy-to-let
Overview
Propositions
Propositions
Foreign nationals
Retirement interest-only
Portfolio landlords
Existing borrowers
Existing borrowers
Broker product transfers
Porting
Tools and support
Tools and support
Supporting vulnerable clients
Affordability calculator
Rental calculator
Submit and track business
Paper application process
Broker FAQs
Information
Information
Fees and charges
Proc fees
Useful forms
Legal conveyancing service
Keep up to date
News
Blog
About us
FOR INTERMEDIARY USE ONLY
Contact
Find a BDM
Paying fees
Accessibility tools
Search
Home
Intermediaries
Lending criteria
Buy-to-let lending criteria
Lending criteria breakdown
Buy-to-let lending criteria
Here's a brief overview of the key factors we consider when assessing a buy-to-let mortgage application:
The applicant(s)
Introduction
The maximum number of applicants is four. Only two will be used for affordability.
Minimum age
The minimum age is 21.
Maximum age at the end of the term
The maximum age is 85.
Residency and property ownership
The main applicant (the main income earner) must be or have been, an owner-occupier of a property in the UK. The applicants must have lived in the UK for the last two years.
HM Armed Forces personnel abroad are considered residents of the UK during their deployment. In the case of foreign nationals, the applicants must have permanent rights to live in the UK and be able to evidence this. We can’t accept applicants on working visas.
Deposit
A deposit or a gift from an immediate family member is acceptable for standard buy-to-let applications. The person making the gift must not occupy the property.
We can’t accept builder's incentives or personal loans as a source of deposit. Builder's incentives must be treated as a reduction in the purchase price.
Convictions
Applicants must not have unspent convictions or pending prosecutions for fraud or dishonesty.
Credit history: subject to passing credit score, we can consider the following
CCJs and Defaults less than £500 may be considered.
CCJs and Defaults more than £500 can also be considered if they weren’t registered in the last 3 years.
Missed payments – Status 1 and 2 are acceptable, provided the commitment is up to date.
Bankrupts who’ve been discharged for at least three years.
Loan criteria
Minimum loan
The minimum loan is £30,000.
Maximum loan
The maximum loan is £750,000, inclusive of any capitalised fees.
Maximum LTV for houses
The maximum LTV for houses is 80%, inclusive of fees.
Maximum LTV for flats
The maximum LTV for flats is 80%, inclusive of fees.
Minimum term
The minimum term is three years.
Maximum term
The maximum term is 35 years.
Repayment methods
Your client can apply for a mortgage on a whole, wholly interest-only or part repayment/part interest-only basis.
We don’t need policies assigned to us for interest-only mortgages. But your client must have a lump sum at the end of the term to repay the capital they borrowed.
Unacceptable loan purpose
Unacceptable loan purposes include:
Sale and rent-back cases, distressed sales and remortgages where the original vendor still lives in the property.
Regulated buy-to-let applications where the property is being let to a family member.
Remortgage applications where the property has been owned for less than six months.
Properties where the applicant is buying in their name from their limited company.
Repayment of unsecured business loans.
Injection of business capital.
Speculative purposes.
Making of gifts.
Income and affordability
Assessment of rental income
The rental income must cover at least 145% of the monthly interest part of your mortgage payment. The mortgage payment is currently calculated on an interest-only basis at:
Pay rate for 5 year fixed rates.
Pay rate for like-for-like remortgages.
Pay rate +2% for all other lending.
The rental income is based on your estimate and is subject to confirmation from the valuer. The valuer will assess the rental income based on a family dwelling for an unfurnished property.
Minimum income
There is no minimum income requirement.
Buy-to-let property criteria
Introduction
The property must:
Have an energy performance certificate (EPC) rating of E or higher dated in the last ten years.
Be subject to selective licencing but not a house in multiple occupations.
Have a maximum of five bedrooms.
We'll ask for a copy of the AST agreement and selective licence where applicable for properties with five bedrooms.
Be located in England or Wales.
Provide basic standards.
Tenancy criteria
Only the property must be let on a single assured shorthold tenancy (AST) agreement.
Where the tenancy is longer than 12 months, it must be a Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) model agreement.
The AST must be renewable at least every 36 months and no less than six months.
Maximum of four people on an AST.
We agree to you letting the property subject to your compliance with the following conditions:
Any tenancy existing at the date of completion or created after must be:
to a private individual or, if to more than one such individual, to all of them jointly.
to an individual or individuals who don’t enjoy diplomatic immunity.
an assured shorthold tenancy as defined in the Housing Acts.
for a fixed period not exceeding 12 months.
in respect of the whole of the property.
for residential use only.
in writing.
Property type criteria
Flats
Flats requiring an EWS1 form must provide a valid EWS1 form to support the property valuation.
Where flats are in a block, flats above the fourth floor need lift access.
Flats and studios need a minimum of 35 m2.
Leasehold only (85-year lease minimum).
£100,000 minimum property value.
The following types aren't acceptable:
Property with any commercial use, including flats in a mixed-use block.
Flats converted from an office or industrial building.
Ex-local authority flats, apartments or maisonettes.
Flats with open deck or balcony access.
Houses
Leasehold, subject to a minimum unexpired lease term of 85 years.
£70,000 minimum property value.
Maximum three floors.
Freehold.
Acceptable properties
Construction methods
Property must be constructed with the following methods:
Wimpey No-fines House and Laing Easiform house can be considered subject to a satisfactory valuation.
Structurally insulated panel systems (SIPS).
Modern timber frame or oak frame.
Insulated concrete formwork (ICF).
Modern steel frame.
Brick or stone walls.
Cladding
Properties can be clad in:
Modern render system (cement, line, acrylic or silicone).
Timber up to 25% of external wall surface area.
Metal (zinc, copper, aluminium or steel).
Traditional bricks or stone.
Brick slips.
Roofing
Acceptable roofs include:
Flat roofs are acceptable and subject to a minimum 25-year insurance-backed guarantee.
Pitched slate or tile roof.
Thatched.
Solar panels
Houses fitted with solar panels are acceptable, provided that:
building cover includes adequate insurance cover any damage caused to the property by the solar panels.
the lease agreement meets our minimum standards.
Our free legal service isn't available for remortgage applications on houses with leased solar panels.
Unacceptable properties
The property can’t be constructed with the following methods:
Properties with timber cladding covering more than 25% of the surface wall area.
Any construction covered by the housing defect laws, such as:
unrepaired prefabricated reinforced concrete.
high alumina cement.
large panel systems.
Straw bale, hempcrete and volumetric construction.
Sedum (living green) roofs.
We can't accept applications for:
The applicant intending to let the property to the local authority to use for social housing.
Properties being purchased from or connected to a property club.
.Property classified as a house of multiple occupation (HMO).
This includes properties subject to mandatory, selective or extra licencing requirements.
Second homes or holiday homes for personal use.
Properties not in a habitable condition.
Freehold flats.
In a mostly HMO-licensed area, we recommend that applicants check with the local authority before applying. The property may need an HMO licence.
Limited company buy-to-let lending criteria
Lending criteria
We accept buy-to-let mortgage applications from limited companies. Here’s our criteria. We may still be able to help you if your case doesn’t fit every requirement.
Key criteria
A limited company must be a special purpose vehicle (SPV), hold and let residential investment property with one of these standard industrial classification (SIC) codes:
68320: other letting and operating of own or leased real estate.
68209: management of real estate on a fee or contract basis.
68100: buying and selling of own real estate.
Loan to value up to 80%.
No other SIC codes can be accepted.
The rental income must cover at least 125% of the monthly interest payment on an interest-only basis.
Directors and company shareholders need be the same, up to a maximum of four directors.
Partnerships or Limited liability partnerships (LLPs) cannot be considered.
The SPV must be non-trading.
The mortgage payment is calculated at:
Pay rate for 5 year fixed rates.
Pay rate for like-for-like remortgages.
Pay rate +2% for all other lending.
Additional information
All directors of the limited company must personally guarantee the full loan amount. A floating charge won't be needed.
The assessment of the application will include reviewing all other properties owned by the limited company.
Portfolio landlords application
Definition
The applicant is a portfolio landlord if the application includes four or more properties. This includes limited company buy-to-lets and mortgaged properties.
Properties held in the names of any of the borrowers, whether solely or jointly, should be included in the portfolio.
Portfolio criteria
The buy-to-let portfolio must meet these criteria, including unencumbered and managed properties.
Maximum LTV for the portfolio
The maximum LTV for the portfolio is 75%.
Maximum buy-to-let portfolio size
The maximum buy-to-let portfolio size is 15 buy-to-let properties. At most, five properties can be mortgaged with us.
Additional information
The rental income must show the whole portfolio is self-supporting. This includes unencumbered properties and the property to be mortgaged.
It must meet the following income coverage ratio calculation:
Maximum interest coverage ratio of 145%.
Assumed stressed interest rate of 5.70%.
It must be demonstrated that the landlord:
has grown their portfolio gradually, and any properties bought in the last 12 months haven't been purchased quickly.
has considered the portfolio's ongoing and future management, including professional and management fees.
has at least two years of experience in managing investment properties.
has no more than 25% of the overall portfolio as HMO properties.
Consumer buy-to-let
Key information
Consumer buy-to-let (CBTL) rules will apply to remortgage applicants who don't own any other let properties and either:
wish to let their current home while buying a new residential property (known as a let-to-buy).
have themselves, or a close relative, previously lived in the property and now wish to let it.
have inherited the property and wish to let it.
All advisers submitting a CBTL application must hold the relevant CBTL FCA permissions. They must also have their normal mortgage ones. They must be on an advised sale basis.
We’ll assess buy-to-let applications and the choice of products on offer in the same way for CBTL and investment property loan (IPL).
Let-to-buy
Key information
Suppose your client is remortgaging their home onto a let-to-buy basis with us in a standard buy-to-let application. We need their new residential mortgage offer on the property they're buying. If the residential property is being bought with cash, we must see the memorandum of sale and full purchase details.
Further advances
Key information
We can offer further advances to customers with standard buy-to-let mortgages.
Currently, we cannot offer further advances on limited company buy-to-let mortgages.
Supporting documents
Key information
For each application, we need:
A signed application declaration or application form.
A completed assets and liabilities form.
ID for each applicant:
UK photocard driving licence (full or provisional).
UK paper driving licence (full only).
UK or EU passport.
Council tax bill.
It's assumed that an electoral roll search will verify proof of address. If verification doesn't happen, you'll be asked to provide one of the following documents:
Bank statement (postal or printed and stamped in branch).
UK photocard driving licence (full or provisional).
UK paper driving licence (full only).
Local authority tenancy agreement.
Tax credit or pension credit letter.
HMRC tax code notification.
Credit card bill (postal only).
Mortgage statement.
State pension letter.
State benefit letter.
Recent utility bill.
Council tax bill
All submitted documents must be photocopies of the originals. We can't consider photographs or camera-scanned documents.
We must use a different document to check the applicant's ID and address.
If you cannot provide any of the above documents, please contact the intermediary enquiry line on 0344 481 2010. Press option 2 to discuss further options.
Cookies policy
Privacy policy
Terms of business
Sitemap